All right.
So far on this course, we found that by simply redefining our notion of space time and how it operates,
we introduced a lot of ripple effects within the body of theoretical physics, which led to some really
weird relativistic effects that were cropping up here and there.
What we're going to do in this video is we're going to dig a bit further into those ripple effects and
introduce probably one of the biggest ripple effects that had the most long lasting impact upon physics
in and of itself.
What am I talking about here?
What we're going to consider is something that seems on the surface, somewhat odd, somewhat contradictory
and sort of absurd, but actually ended up becoming true.
And this is the idea of massless particles.
What I'm going to state that the ripple effect that was created by introducing this into the body of
theoretical physics was huge, right?
By finding out that, yes, indeed, we could have mass particles that eventually gave birth to the
first ideas of quantum mechanics and this whole different subdivision of modern physics.
OK, so let's go back to the question of a massive particle first.
What does that even mean?
Can we have a mass particle?
Well, from a classical physics standpoint, that sounds absolutely absurd, right?
Because we would say that, you know, the notion of a mass is particle that's complete and utter nonsense.
Why?
Because after all, if a particle was mass lists and its mass M was equal to zero, we can just look
at energy and momentum.
Our classical definitions, right?
The kinetic energy is equal to one and b squared.
And the momentum is equal to M times B, and we can reason through and assert that if we had a mass
this particle, well, these equations imply that there could never, ever have any kind of energy or
any kind of momentum.
And that seems absurd because if we had some kind of particle and it was moving, if it had some kind
of velocity, well, just thinking about classical ideas and concepts, regardless of the equations
that would assert that there would be some kind of energy that allowed it to actually exhibit some kind
of motion, right?
It needed to have some energy.
And by moving, it would have some momentum.
So these equations classically insinuate that it's absolutely absurd to state that a mass mass less
particle could even exist in reality.
Now you might be thinking, Well, wait a second.
We know that weird ideas and concepts crop up when we start going close to the speed of light and relativistic
effects arise.
Maybe that could happen, right?
Well, what we would say is that let's take a look at energy and momentum using our relativistic definitions.
So if we take a look at that on the right side here, what we find is that our equations state that
no energy is equal to garner Times Square.
We get that gamma factor in there and the momentum is Jonathan's Anton's.
But even with these equations, and even with our relativistic conception of these ideas, we see that
the same argument can really apply in relativistic settings, right?
Because if the mass goes to zero, we see another term in both equations.
And that would imply that these equations suggest that even close to relativistic speeds close to the
speed of light, that both energy and momentum would equal zero in every single circumstance that we
could observe.
So we take our relativistic ideas in our classical ideas now would state that what I'm trying to assert
here that possibly there may be a mass is particle that's complete nonsense.
It doesn't make any sense.
OK?
And I'm sure you would agree with that.
However, what we want to do is we want to take advantage of every tool in every equation we have derived
in relativity and see if it agrees with that duplication, right?
Because our theory, our equations should guide the ideas that are born from our head.
It should allow us to initially explore what's going on in nature.
And then based upon those ideas, we use experimental data to confirm what we're trying to assert.
OK, so let's explore it a bit more, and then we can dive into some experiments to try and confirm
what the theory is telling us.
OK, so what we know is that we have derived different relations between energy and that, and perhaps
they can divulge some interesting facts that can shed some more light upon this master's particle idea.
Does it exist?
And if it does, what in the world is it?
What could it be?
All right, so.
Previously, in a few videos back, we have asserted that we can relate momentum and energy as follows,
we can say that the energy squared is equal to the momentum times the speed of light squared plus the
rest energy square.
Now if we take this, you can see clearly that we're not going to run into the same dilemma that was
illustrated here.
These relations seem to apply that if we had a massless particle where M goes to zero, then this term
cancels out, right?
We find that this becomes zero.
And if we take the square root will end up with is that the energy is equal to the momentum times the
speed of light.
Now this is a very important assertion because unlike these two equations, this is asserting that at
some points, depending upon the motion, depending upon the momentum and mass, this particle could
still have some energy, which means that.
Perhaps the park will could exist, so this relation is asserting that existence is possible for romance
is particle, even though these equations here are saying that it's complete and utter nonsense.
So that's pretty interesting.
Now we can have a mass particle with some energy.
And I know that sounds absurd.
Sounds weird.
Well, what?
What would the energy be?
How would we calculate the momentum to calculate the total energy?
There's a lot of questions that are evoked once we come to this conclusion.
OK, I want you to hold on to that in the back of your head, and let's chug forward.
Let's ask the more questions and try to divulge some more meaning and some more interesting facts.
So the natural thing to do is after we come up with this, we have one other relation that we put together
while studying all this.
What we asserted is that.
The velocity of a particle over the speed of light had to be equal to the wind that sometimes the speed
of light P.S. Over eight.
So if we take this guy here and we throw it into this guy here, we see something pretty interesting,
right?
So the energy for a mass is particle.
If the mass is equal to zero, must be equal to p times c.
And when we put it into this equation, we see that this becomes one.
And this would imply a very interesting fact.
Look, what we have here is multiply sea over sea times one and we see that.
A massless particle must travel at the speed of light.
Whoa, wait, a second, that's a huge assertion.
Let that sink in.
Think about that for a bit.
On NASA's particle can have some energy.
And it will have to travel at the speed of light.
So that's pretty interesting.
Let's try to dissect that a bit if we harken back to our previous studies.
When we are studying momentum, when I stated, is that?
Our momentum gamma and V remember.
As we came closer, the speed of light.
It shot up.
And what we stated is that the inertia is building up the extra mass relativistic mass, so to speak.
We don't really talk about that.
We want to talk about rest, mass.
But the additional inertia makes it harder to accelerate to higher velocity, to a point that it would
take almost an infinite amount of energy to accelerate a particle with mass to the speed of light.
But what this is saying is that Wolf, we didn't have that mass if we didn't have that inertia.
We could travel at the speed of light.
OK, so it's sort of interesting how this sort of connects back through ideas about momentum.
And it implies one other thing.
We know that only one thing due to what I just talked about what the energy and momentum only one thing
in the universe.
As far as we know, can travel at the speed of light.
What is that?
That is light.
Right?
Only light can travel at the speed of light.
So this means the source insinuates that light is a mass this particle.
If this were true.
Well, that's sort of weird, because classically in electromagnetism, we assert that.
Light is a wave, right?
It's an electromagnetic wave, and it propagates through space at a constant frequency.
Right?
So what is it?
Is it a wave?
Is it a particle?
Or perhaps it's both.
Who knows?
Who knows.
So this brings up a lot of interesting questions that puzzled a lot of scientists back in the day.
It puzzled Einstein, and we'll find that I came up with a very viable solution and gave birth sort
of to quantum mechanics.
In doing so and puzzled another scientist, Max Planck, another individual, Arthur Compton, which
we'll get to in the next few videos.
But if we slow down a bit, let's explore this fact.
There's sort of seems to be a glaring contradiction that I sort of put forth here, right?
Because these guys seem to insinuate that a massive particle could exist and there are other implications
behind it, such as that massive particle would travel at the speed of light.
But our relativistic equations sort of appear for energy momentum state that, well, you can't really
define these guys.
So the existence of a mass of particles absolutely absurd.
Did we miss anything?
Can you see any kind of contradiction?
Let me spell it out for you, so we're going to do is we're going to reconsider these equations in a
different light.
And doing so, we're going to find that they do actually allow massive particles to exist, which is
super important because if we want to figure out.
The energy and momentum of this massive particle ready to fully define its motion and what's going on,
we would need to know.
How to find these guys the energy and moment.
OK, so if we take these and we look at the Garneau factor, something interesting starts to pop out.
We can use this that they've holds that.
So we know that the gamma factor is one of the square root times, one minus the quantity we oversee
squared.
And we know that a massive particle as M goes to zero.
This has to go to the speed of light.
This is what the math is communicating to us.
That's what it's dictating.
So if we take the limit when the math goes that zero or once it goes through the speed of light, we
see something pretty interesting here as we approach the speed of light.
This guy blows up, this guy blows up.
And that's why the energy momentum blow up as we approach.
See, right?
We saw that graphically.
We saw that illustrated before, you know this, right?
So.
This tells us that the discount factor blows up, but the mass is going towards zero.
So what does that say?
Well, let's let's let's look at the limit.
So the limit as M goes to zero, if E is the limit of this guy, we know, we sort of got an interesting,
interesting quantity we get.
Well, this guy is going to go to infinity, but AM is going to go to zero.
So what in the world is infinity time zero?
I don't know that's not even defined, right?
It's not defined.
Similarly, if we take the momentum right, we have another game of times Empires V, we get the same
exact oddity, the same exact absurd quantity, which doesn't have any bearing upon reality right now.
We have sort of a mathematical interpretation of infinity and zero, but from a physical standpoint,
from reality, this doesn't convey any kind of meaning.
So what we find is that when we start considering massless particles, these equations break down.
They don't provide any information.
They cannot consider this situation.
OK.
So both these quantities are undefined, and that allows for the existence of mass loss particles.
Right.
We can't assert that since the energy and momentum are zero, which they are not, we just prove that
right here that, you know, the particle may have some kind of energy momentum.
So there's there's no way it could exist, such as the argument we used in classical mechanics.
So we have a very interesting framework here.
Right?
What do we discover?
We discovered that these equations assert that unlike in the classical sense, a mass particle could
potentially exist.
And furthermore, if it did, we could define its energy.
And it seems like that massless particle not only is light, but travels at the speed of light.
Whoa.
That is a huge ripple effect.
We just dumped a huge boulder into the body of theoretical physics and the ripple of create.
It is frickin huge.
That's like a tsunami hitting the land, right?
So what you want to do has a big implication from theory.
Here is.
We want to try and find this particle, right, does it exist?
Can we figure out what it is?
How do we measure the energy?
How do we measure the momentum?
Well, the first thing this theory is sort of elucidating is that it probably is light.
This is probably giving us some more information about light.
Is light a particle now, is it not a wave?
What, what is it?
These are the questions we're going to explore and to do this and to not fall into the traps that scientists
fell into in the beginning of this course.
When they're trying to prescribe how reality shall behave, we have an idea we're going to explore it
in the universe and we're going to let the universe communicate with us and tell us what it actually
is.
Right?
We do not want to prescribe how the universe should behave.
Rather, we want to observe and then use that to form the basis of our assertions.
OK, so before we jump into that, I want to do a quick and quick example to show you that, yes, we
can use this to analyze some very interesting scenarios.
And then we're going to jump in two different experiments that Einstein and some of his colleagues did
to try and explore this idea.
And what they discovered was, it's going to be super interesting and it's going to be the birth of
quantum mechanics.
Let's jump at that example.